<h1>Chapter 2 - It took a particular miner</h1>
<h2>Creating the area's first industry</h2>
https://www.lomaricatv.com/preview/chapters/graphics/empire mine headshaft.jpg
Empire Mine Head shaft, the largest in the area

Grass Valley and neighboring Nevada City came to be because of gold. When the rush originally started in 1849 the miners largely ignored existing property rights, and they rushed to the rivers, in spots where the gold was so richly concentrated that simple placer mining could be employed. Since the gold is heavier than most other materials it tends to settle out first in areas of slower moving water. So the first minors simply panned for gold, where they would scoop up some alluvial deposits and slowly agitate and flush the pan with more water counting on the heavier gold to settle to the bottom of the pan with everything else slowly being flushed out. This was a largely inefficient process as it could take about 10 hours to process approximately one cubic yard of material. Early on when panning was in its infancy, that was not a bad proposition as there was plenty of easy gold for the picking, as they say.

https://www.lomaricatv.com/preview/chapters/graphics/ch1-65 Gold_mining_rocker_box.jpg
Soon more efficient methods were adopted. A rocker box or cradle was used to process more material at a time. It consisted of a box that could be rocked that had several screens, riffles, and channels along the bottom of a tray to separate the heavier gold from the rest of the material that was slowly flushed out. It allowed the miner to process three or four times as much material at a time as a simple pan would.

https://www.lomaricatv.com/preview/chapters/graphics/ch1-66 sluice box.jpg
Sluice Box

Next up the scale would be a Sluice box, this allows shovelfuls of material at a time to be dropped into the top of it with a source of water running through it. Again, sets of riffles along the bottom of the box would trap the gold. While this can process lots of material it is claimed that they only recovered 40% of the gold shoveled into it. So, the tradeoff was more material could be sifted through at a time, at the expense of gold that went unrecovered. But volume of soil processed won out.

By 1850 most of the easily accessible gold had been collected. Now gold miners got more aggressive about hoarding the sites that still might harbor easy to harvest gold. There were some organized attacks on foreign miners, especially Latin Americans and Chinese. The newly founded California Legislature in 1850 passed a foreign miner’s tax of $20/mo. That would be over $600/mo today.

Besides the diseases the outsiders brought, the miners forcibly started evicting Native Americans from their lands. Some responded by attacking the miners. This led to attacks against native villages. Being outgunned led to massacres of the natives. Those surviving often starved without access to their food gathering areas.

This led to a temporary military post being erected southwest of Grass Valley, near present day Marysville. For three years Camp Far West as it was known, was strategically placed to safeguard the travel routes to the area's mines. The post's commander Captain Hannibal Day, noted that the hardy and well-armed miner was being defended by an under-fed and scurvy-weakened soldier from "a miserable race of savages . . . armed only with the bow and arrow." That said much about the plight of the natives and their treatment.

Over time the individual miner gave way to industrial scale mining as most of the easily accessible surface gold had been recovered. One of the three ways of accomplishing this was with Hydraulic Mining. By 1853 this new level of intrusion to extract gold was in use. Hydraulic mining, employing jets of high-pressure water were used on gravel beds that flanked the river, but also on entire hillsides and bluffs. The loosened gravel would then pass over sluices. This resulted in large amounts of gravel, silt, and other materials to be washed downstream. The major economic advantage to this method was overhead. Hydraulic mining took one quarter of the manpower that other types of mining took for the same amount of gold extracted.

https://www.lomaricatv.com/preview/chapters/graphics/ch1-70 hydraulic-mining.jpg
High Pressure mining: The loosened gravel would then pass over sluices (red)

Where this type of mining was done still bears the scars today, as the topsoil has been washed away and the underlying rock does not support vegetation. One of the worse examples of this type of mining is only a few air miles north of Grass Valley on the other side of the South Yuba river canyon on a ridge separating the Middle and South Forks of the Yuba River. This area became known as the Malakoff Diggins. In 1866 the North Bloomfield Mining and Gravel Company was formed to mine this area. By 1874 they had carved a 7,800 ft long drainage tunnel through a ridge to facilitate the processing of 50,000 tons per day of gravel set loose by seven giant "monitors," giant water cannons, working 24/7. To allow the round the clock operations, an early use of high intensity electric light was installed. The waste tailings, also called slickens, were dumped into the Yuba River, which eventually destroyed farmland as far down stream as Sacramento.

Much of those tailings can be found downstream where they choked rivers and stream beds. Some areas downstream saw those beds raise approximately 100 feet. The I street bridge in Sacramento had to be raised 20 feet. Eventually this situation led to one of the first environmental court decisions. The Sawyer Decision, named after the judge who handed down the ruling, caused this type of mining to cease in 1884.

One result of this type of mining was the invention and implementation of river dredging to clear out debris in the waterways all the way down to the San Francisco Bay. This dredging was also applied to the Yuba River near Marysville. But by 1904 onward most of the dredging was done away from the river in what came to be known as Yuba or Hammonton Dredge Field, named after the man who started in the area with two dredges.

https://www.lomaricatv.com/preview/chapters/graphics/ch1-71 Yuba-Gold-Dredge-17-Lake.jpg
Long abandoned but still floating. About 20 miles downstream from the Grass Valley area.

The dredges appear much like industrial versions of a flat bottom riverboat with a bucket line conveyor in the front that would scoop up material and convey it into the boat where it usually was dumped into a circular rotating screen sloped downward. As the material traversed down this screened tunnel it first encountered a small mesh screen to allow the fine material, including gold to filter out. As the material continued down the tunnel it encountered larger mesh screen to let the large chunks or rocks fall out. The fine material fell into a sluice box, which worked as other smaller ones used alongside streams. All the material that was discarded, the tailings, were expelled out the back by a spreader or stacker as it was called and was left behind the boat as tailing piles.

The boat would reside in its own man made pond, digging its way forward and filling in the leftovers behind it. The pond literally only surrounds the boat and moved forward as the boat dug its way forward. Much gold was left behind, and in some instances, the same ground was literally plowed through again. But by the late 1960s the extraction of gold became uneconomical and the search for gold stopped. But recent satellite photos still show a couple vessels sitting in these artificial ponds, supposedly now digging out aggregate to produce concrete. This area from the air is said to resemble a vast network of intestines. The field is about four miles long and extends a little over a mile south of the river and is about 15 miles downstream from Grass Valley.

This was not the only area nearby that underwent the dredging process. About 50 miles south of Grass Valley, on the edge of the eastern Sacramento Valley was the Folsom Gold Field. This was along the American River, most of it south of it. It stretched 10 miles downstream to the Sacramento suburb of Fair Oaks, and south from the river by six miles. It had dredging operations into the early 1960s. The Aerojet rocket engine company settled in the area, as they found the tailing piles made good abutments to retain rocket blasts during testing.

While none of the others were anywhere near as massive and invasive as the Yuba and Folsom fields, many rivers flowing out of the central Sierras had dredging efforts where those rivers met the valley to capture gold that was being wash out of the mountains downstream, by natural forces, or the gold set loose during Placer mining but not actually recovered in the mining process. It is estimated that most of the gold dug up was lost downstream.

The third and most enduring way to extract industrial volumes of gold, mining had to go underground. Miners started engaging in "coyoteing." Digging a shaft 20 to 40 feet deep into deposits near a stream, and then tunneling out from the shaft. Gold mining continued to get more sophisticated and destructive. Miners at times would divert a creek away from its current streambed and into a sluice beside it. They would then dig out the exposed streambed. But some those shafts and the tunnels radiating out from them got much deeper and longer. Deep shaft mining rapidly became the way to recover gold in the area.

There were three big deep shaft mines that survived a fair ways into the 20th century, and we will look at them now. One owner, who ended up owning the two largest mines, looked outward from the Grass Valley area, while the other concentrated his gaze locally. As we will see one inadvertently greatly changed the trajectory of the area from a technological standpoint.

<h2>The Big Two Mines</h2>
The largest two mines in the area, first the North Star, and later the Empire came to be owned by William Bowers Bourn II. What helped kick start the large mines in the area was that capital and new mining technology flowed back to the area after the Comstock Lode silver mining area in Nevada declined in the mid-1870s. This silver strike, about 80 air miles east of Grass Valley was made by a company of Mormon emigrants and for a while enticed a lot of would be gold prospectors to become silver prospectors.

The other catalyst for these mines were the Cornish that came to the area. The area still has a Cornish influence to this day, including an annual Cornish Christmas Festival held in Grass Valley. For several years in the 1850s deep shaft mining stalled at a shallow depth. The problem is when you dig deep and get below the water table, water will insidiously try to fill the dug-out voids. Enter the Cornish, or Cousin Jack's and Jenny's as they were called. The Cornish immigrants brought hard rock mining experience and technology from the tin and copper mines of Cornwall. The tin mines in England had collapsed due to cheaper production in other parts of the world. These were miners that knew how to keep deep shafts dry, and had developed the needed pump technology, and each steam-powered Cornish pump could draw out 18,000 gallons of water per hour. The first Cornish pump was installed in an area mine in 1855.

By 1861 most of the hard rock mining was carried out by the Cornish, and they began to form a distinct community in Grass Valley.

The Empire mine is the oldest, largest, deepest mine in California. It has 367 miles of tunnels. Between 1850 and its closure in 1956, the Empire Mine produced 5.8 million ounces of gold. It is believed that the underlying rock in the area contain between three and seven ounces of gold per ton. In 1854 the mine site was incorporated into the Empire Mining Company. Apart from World War II, the mine continued in operation until 1957. There were several times when the mine appeared to have reached the end of its productive life, in the 1870s, and 1890s. But new technology, and often simple perseverance would prevail over defeat and the mine would soldier on.

https://www.lomaricatv.com/preview/chapters/graphics/ch1-83 Cornish-Christmas-Bell-Ringer.jpg
Cornish Festival

<h3>Bourn and his mines</h3>
https://www.lomaricatv.com/preview/chapters/graphics/bourn.jpg
William Bowers Bourn II

Technological advances in gold Mining over time included the invention of dynamite in 1867, which replaced more volatile black powder, and the Burleigh mechanical drill in 1869, both of which created a technological revolution in the mining industry. Due to the hazardous rock dust these drills created however, the drills, also called widow makers, did not come into widespread use until the 1890s. Miners unions successfully resisted the widow makers until then, when the devices were finally designed to be less dangerous.

The mine reached a death of 1600 feet in 1886, and 115 men were employed underground, with eight at the stamp mills. The mine used a Pelton water wheels, which were extremely efficient at extracting the waters impulse energy, to power the stamp mill. The efficiency of the Pelton wheel meant that it would work in creeks where the flow of water would not be enough to power wheels of traditional design. Pelton’s wheel used cup shape blades instead of flat ones that had several funnels pointed at them that concentrated and thus increased the water pressure hitting the modified blades.

In 1888 after a couple of men were killed in a blast that destroyed much of the surface infrastructure of the mine. Tensions between labor and management ran high.

In the 1890s technology enabled many more deposits, especially large but low-grade accumulations, to be profitably worked. The improvements of air drills, explosives, and pumps, and the introduction of electric power lowered mining cost greatly. In 1890, the same year in which Cornish immigration reached its peak, the mine introduced new compressed air powered drills that allowed rapid drilling without creating the hazardous dust of earlier models. While these advances allowed for cheaper, safer mining, it required fewer miners.

https://www.lomaricatv.com/preview/chapters/graphics/ch1-84 empire mine model 1.jpg
https://www.lomaricatv.com/preview/chapters/graphics/ch1-85 empire mine model 2.jpg

https://www.lomaricatv.com/preview/chapters/graphics/ch1-86 empire mine model 3.jpg
https://www.lomaricatv.com/preview/chapters/graphics/ch1-87 empire mine model 5.jpg
