<h1>If it weren't for the gold!</h1>
This is a story about an iconic company in the television broadcast industry, that took the name of a town, and eventually left and took the name with it. If you are an American Football fan you might recall the story of the Cleveland Browns. In 1996 the owner of the team announced the team was moving to Baltimore. Eventually the town fought and won the right to keep the Brown's name, while the team left town and took the name of the "Ravens." In this story the company took the name of the town with them and have currently settled in a place where 99% of the folks have no idea of the company's original reason for having the name that it does.

The first half of the book answers that question, that there's a small town in northern California, and if you work in the technical or production areas of the television industry anywhere in the world, you know the name of the town. You probably wouldn't know it as a place, but as a vendor of high–end television production equipment. The building below is the last vestige of the Grass Valley Company remaining in the town of Grass Valley.

The Grass Valley Company started what became the greatest concentration of high–end video manufacturing in the world. At one time, but no longer, the area had the highest population, per capita, working in the industry than anywhere else IN THE WORLD!

This is a place today that still has almost two dozen companies that compete in the industry.

The building happens to sit on a hill that is riddled with mine shafts. The whole area is infested with these now abandoned shafts. Gold is what the town of Grass Valley, along with the adjacent town of Nevada City, grew up on.

https://www.lomaricatv.com/\preview\chapters\graphics/nv building 2.JPG

As we will see the mine shafts that are hidden deep below this building were owned by a man who would inadvertently set into motion a series of events that would cause the germination of that cluster of high–tech endeavors that prevented the towns from becoming a backwater after the gold mining ceased. The secondary industry, lumber, was also in decline by the 1950s.

The towns, which still today sit two dozen miles from the nearest interstate, would be stops for people on their way to somewhere else if not for a few unlikely events. While the town's shops, and bed and breakfast establishments would be quaint, and its art colony probably still thriving, the towns would not have played a part on the worldwide stage as they have, and to a slightly lessor level, still do today.

It took gold, not because electronics uses the material, but because the owner of a local mine laid the seed for all that followed. The area is littered with these mines, from extremely large, to holes in the ground. All because a mine owner, who happened to own the very mine that this building sits atop, was convinced that the area needed a new "modern" hospital. The building of that hospital, never used as a hospital, a casualty of WWII, started a cascade of events that turned the mining and lumber town into a mini high–tech mecca.

The second thread to the story started down in the bay area. What became a very large defense contractor, and an early founding entity in what became Silicon Valley, was founded by a Stanford alumnus, who decided to escape the area. He decamped and took a small sapling from this company and planted it in Grass Valley. Why there? Because of what the mine owner had begun.

That entrepreneur enticed another Stanford alumnus of the same cloth, to join him up in the Sierra foothills. This second Stanford alumnus formed a company that allowed a mini "Fairchild effect," like the one that happened in Silicon Valley, to be replicated in Grass Valley. A high–tech eco–system sprung up in the area. One result was the first gaming cartridge console from Atari. The R&D was done in Grass Valley.

The original company that "started it all" in the area, to quote a Fairchild Semiconductor boast from the 70s regarding Silicon Valley, was bought and sold six times, so far.

For the first few years of its life the "Group" as they proudly referred to themselves as, cast about for a reason to exist. The company that started "video valley" as some have called it, the Grass Valley Group knew nothing of video when they arrived in town. The small company had come to the area from the east. Grass Valley Group, or GVG, to this day is still referred to as the Group by many old timers, even though the Group was dropped from the name long ago. The Group very well could have had Stanford or even Fresno before the word Group.

Then an ally with an ABC owned San Francisco TV station, suggested that if they made some refinements to a video distribution amp, ubiquitous in television stations, that they might be able to compete against the likes of the then giants RCA, and GE among others. Some thought that idea preposterous, but in short order they produced their first model. From then on when opportunity sprang up, the group was able to respond quickly to each new avenue presented to them.

Their big early benefactor, ABC, the third in a three–way network universe at the time, wasn't able to get a piece of equipment they needed for an upcoming large event and turned to the Group in desperation. The network asked the Group if they could produce a "Proc Amp." Dr. Hare, the Group's founder, president, and chief engineer's first response was "What the hell is a proc amp?" Within 10 days they had a working prototype that was even in a case. That was the Group's way early on. Respond quickly to opportunity. As the story will show, years on, the company did not always keep that in sight.

From the products that were rudimentary processing equipment used by television broadcasters, the group produced more exotic and complex systems that moved the company up the professional television broadcasting food chain. They pushed product lines that had been pioneered and developed for twenty years by the industry leaders of the day and soon had the entrenched players following Grass Valley's lead in innovation.

The Group became the dominant player in video production switchers. These are devices that allow all the layers of graphics, effects, and a myriad of sources to be integrated into a complex mosaic of video. Oh yeah, this is all done in real time while the newscast, sporting event, or entertainment show is happening.

https://www.lomaricatv.com\preview\chapters\graphics\ch2-211 hollywood palace abc.jpg
https://www.lomaricatv.com\preview\chapters\graphics\starwars.jpg

By the mid 1970's the Group had enough of the high-end video market that one of the props used to destroy Princess Leia's home planet of "Alderaan" in the first Star Wars film, was a video 'fader bar' on a Grass Valley 1600 video production switcher. This was the second generation of video switcher production equipment developed by the Group. The Group is still a dominant player in this market.

https://www.lomaricatv.com\preview\chapters\graphics\sony trinitron monitor.jpg
For over six decades television's technical and production bigwigs made the trek to this town to collaborate with the technical gurus that had congregated here. The Group affected the world, and the world affected the Group. They were on the stage with the mighty and powerful.

They were pushed around by the likes of George Soros. They cooperated with and then competed against Sony. In some ways Sony and the Group were kindred spirits, in that both started out not knowing what to produce, with forceful founders, and the early embrace of semi-conductors. Both made large marks on the arenas they played in.

The Group was the sturdy Oak for many years, that only grafted a spin off once, but dropped acorns all around it, and the lone tree, became a stand of trees. A mini "Fairchild Effect" to what happened down in Silicon Valley.

As we will see many improbable things had to happen for the Group and other high-techs that sprung up around it to have occurred. We mentioned two dozen miles from the nearest interstate, how about 60 miles from the nearest commercial airport.

https://www.lomaricatv.com\preview\chapters\graphics\gvg logo green.jpg
https://www.lomaricatv.com\preview\chapters\graphics\preface_gvlogo.jpg
Maybe the most improbable thing we will see in this story is that the Grass Valley name, as a company, still exists. As mentioned, the company had been sold and spun off a half dozen times, and it now has DNA from almost three dozen companies! At times it was only a division of companies many times its size. Through the various ownership changes it was merged with other "best of breed" companies. Yet it is the Grass Valley brand that is still standing. Maybe a bit nicked, as its logically historically green GV logo, is now magenta.

<h2>Virtual business and company</h2>
It was not just the ravages of being a trading card to be passed around, it is also the technology that launched the company to outposts around the globe from the area, and now that launch pad no longer has a payload, just remnants of what had been blasted off.

Operationally GV is no longer even a U.S. concern, it is Canadian. So, riddle me this: Why would an international company, with thousands of employees take the name of a small town in northern California? The second half of the book answers that.

At one time the Group was the largest employer in the area, employing about 1400. Today only a few dozen in the area still get paychecks from GV. The fortunes of business caused a lot of this. But the way the high-tech world works has changed and that has not only affected equipment vendors like GV, but their customers also.

https://www.lomaricatv.com\preview\chapters\graphics\kayak panel and tub.jpg
Switcher control panel and the electronics it controls (below panel)

Used to be the production crew had to be co-located at the venue or place that the televised event was occurring. Today not so much. Internet connectivity and ever–increasing computing horsepower has seen to that. The video production switcher, which the Group is still a dominant player, no longer needs to be co-located with the electronics that support it.

The evolution of this new way of "doing things" has affected this industry greatly. When the Group first started making switchers the control panel and the electronics it controlled where connected by several fat cables with lots of conductors. In the 90s the connection was over Ethernet.

https://www.lomaricatv.com\preview\chapters\graphics\kayak panel and tub cloud.jpg
Today it can be over the cloud.

The pandemic put the march down this path on steroids. It has induced great change in the Grass Valley Company particularly as the stage has been set, finally, to not only use the cloud for connectivity, but now to use software, and firmware to replace the switcher's electronic frame. This is called SAAS (Software As A Service). We will look more in depth at this late in the book.

Why was the word "finally" used in the last paragraph? Because as we will see to eliminate hardware and base the majority of processing on software was tried multiple times by the Group in the past. But SAAS as we will see is a two–edged sword. Computer processing has reached the point where "off-the-shelf" boxes, that is computers, can now sit in large server centers with wide connectivity to the world and via software, and in some cases a little hardware thrown in, can mimic what racks of specialized hardware used to do.

What's so bad about that? Well, if you are a vendor of video and audio production hardware, a lot as we will see.

<h2>From hardware to software to anywhere</h2>
https://www.lomaricatv.com\preview\chapters\graphics\remi.jpg

The remote production (or Outside Broadcast as most the world likes to use) industry has been moving towards SAAS for quite a while. It started with the implementation of what the industry calls REMI, or REMote Integration model of video production. Above is a graphical depiction of it. The goal was to only have on location what needed to be on location, and to get that back to a central production facility and combine the audio and video sources into a single, or even multiple programs, as is the case with the Olympics.

The incentive was not to need the large production truck compounds like the picture in the upper right for the Masters golf tournament. The idea was to shrink that down to a single small "transmission" truck that gathered all the sources, or sources that had some pre-mixing, and send it back (back haul) them either over the web, or via satellite.

https://www.lomaricatv.com\preview\chapters\graphics\multiviewer.jpg

<h2>Full Circle</h2>
Literally back where the seeds for Grass Valley Company were laid!

https://www.lomaricatv.com\preview\chapters\graphics\IM Mine.jpg
Late 1800s, the hill on the right of the picture is the hill that the Group's last building is on. The building left of it is the "Head Shaft" of the Idaho-Maryland mine, the mine complex that Errol MacBolye owned, and the person who financed the would–be hospital.

https://www.lomaricatv.com\preview\chapters\graphics\litton building front.jpg
Hospital that never was

The company that got all this started is larger than ever in size. It is ironic that the last building that the company has in the area is up for sale for $2.7 million. That is what the only spin off from the Grass Valley Company paid for it in the early 90s. NVISION was that company, and it played a significant part in this story. NVISION got bought eventually by a company that got bought in short order by another company. Then in a forced marriage NVISION found itself back inside the Grass Valley Company. As fate would have it, what the company had left in the area ended up in this lone building.

https://www.lomaricatv.com\preview\chapters\graphics\nv building.JPG
https://www.lomaricatv.com\preview\chapters\graphics\for sale.jpg

A bazaar conclusion to this story: The building sits atop the very mine complex that was owned by the person who funded the hospital in the first place!

Let's look at how this happened.
